Chandra Shekhar Azad
 was born on 23 July 1906 in Jujhautiya Brahmins family of Pandit SitaramTiwar i and Jagrani Devi in the bhabara (of jhabua District)|madhy Pradesh. He spent his childhood inthe village Bhabhra when his father was serving in the erstwhile estate of Alirajpur 
He got
 the natural training of a hardy and rough life along with the Bhils who inhabited the wildregion. From his Bhil friends, early in life, be learnt wrestling and swimming. He also became moreskilled with the bow and arrow. He learnt to throw the Bhala or Javelin, to shoot straight, to ride anduse the sword, in all of which he became proficient.
From
 his childhood, he remained a devotee of
Hanuman
 throughout his life, and had a very strongPehelwan(wrestler)-like body.
He was even called
 Bhimsen or Bhim Dada later. After the early education in Jhabua, he was sentto theSanskrit Pathashala at Varanasi, where a near relative of the family, probably maternal unclewas then living. He returned home after a few months and he was admitted in the local school at Alirajpur. Again his father sent him to Benares for the boy exhibited a strange waywardness.
This time
 he remained there and studied properly. On the whole, he was an average student.Political Initiation From the very outset, he had a deep aversion for study which was of no real but tosimply churn out quill drivers or babus for the use of the British Raj in India. His stay at Benareshowever had a salutary effect upon his life, for he came in contact with many young men and ideas.
The atmosphere
 was such that he got the opportunity of studying many things, especially the unhappy events which were then happeningin the country. Bit by bit, his mind was being drawn to the political situation of the country. Young Chandra Shekhar was f ascinated by anddrawn to the great national upsurge of the non-violent, non-cooperation movement of 1920-21 under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi.I
t is during
 this time, when the
Jallianwala Baag massacre
 by British Army took place in Amritsar where hunderds (at least 2000) unarmed,peaceful and unwarned civilians were fired upon. This event had a profound effect on Indian national movement and inspired several youngIndians, like Azad, into political movement for liberation. The young mind of Chandrashekhar was wax to receive and marble to retain.
From Chandrashekhar Tewari to Chandrashekhar ‘Azad’
To protest the massacre and demanding the liberation, various popular activities sprouted up throughout the country. While participating in oneof these movements, Chandra Shekhar was arrested when he was just 16 years of age.He was brought to court. The Magistrate asked him, “What is your name?
going to become very famous. He gave his name as ‘
Azad’,
 his father’s name as‘Swatantra’ and his place of dwelling as ‘prison cell’. Astonished was the Magistrate atthese straight and bold answers. Azad was sentenced to fifteen canes. He wasbeaten very severely. At every beat, his body turned blue and red and blood oozed outfreely. Azad was highly honored by the citizens and profusely garlanded when hecame out from jail. His photos appeared in the Press with streamlined captions.
Fromhere on, he would be known far and wide as ‘Azad’, forever.
 After this incident, Shri Provesh, the chief organiser of the Revolutionary Party in India,sought him and persuaded him to join it. Azad proved to be a restless worker. He issuedsecretly and silently, many leaflets and bulletins to drive away the misconceptionsentertained by the people of the country. He proved a master propagandist. In physicalstrength, none equaled him and he was called Bhim Dada. Other eminent members of the party working along with Azad were Shri Yogesh Chatterji, Shri Sachin Sanyal andShri Rabindranath Kar. Men in the party learned all the arts of modern warfare. The mainproblem was finance. Finances! From where could the money be had? This was themajor issue before the party. To ask openly was impossible and to obtain it secretly was amuch more difficult task.